JACK THE GIANT-KILLER.1 

In the reign of King Arthur, there Uved in the county 
of Cornwall, near the Land's End of England, a 
wealthy farmer who had one only son called Jack. He 
was brisk and of a ready lively wit, so that whatever he 
could not perform by force and strength he completed 
by ingenious wit and policy. Never was any person heard 
of that could worst him, and he very often even baffled the 
learned by his sharp and ready invention. 

In those days the Mount of Cornwall was kept by a huge 
and monstrous giant of eighteen feet in height, and about 
three yards in compass, of a fierce and grim countenance, 
the terror of all the neighbouring towns and villages. 
He lived in a cave in the midst of the Mount, and 
would not suffer any one else to live near him. His 
food was other men's cattle, which often became 
his prey, for whensoever he wanted food he would wade 

^ Collated from sundry Chap-books. (Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1711-183$.) 



4 ENGLISH FOLK 

over to the main-land, where he would furnish himself 
with whatever came in his way. The good folk, at his 
approach, forsook their habitations, while he seized on their 
cattle, making nothing of carrying half-a-dozen oxen on his 
back at a time ; and as for their sheep and hogs, he would 
tie them round his waist like a bunch of bandeleirs. This 
course he had followed for many years, so that all Cornwall 
was impoverished by his depredations. 

One day Jack, happening to be present at the town hall 
when the magistrates were sitting in council about the 
giant, asked what reward would be given to the person 
who destroyed him. The giant's treasure, they said, was the 
recompense. Quoth Jack, " Then let me undertake it" 

So he furnished himself with a horn, shovel, and 
pickaxe, and went over to the Mount in the beginning 
of a dark winter's evening, when he fell to work, and 
before morning had dug a pit twenty-two feet deep, and 
nearly as broad, covering it over with long sticks and straw. 
Then strewing a little mould upon it, it appeared like plain 
ground. This completed. Jack placed himself on the con- 
trary side of the pit, fartherest from the giant's lodging, and, 
just at the break of day, he put the horn to his mouth, and 
blew, Tantivy, Tantivy. This unexpected noise aroused 
the giant, who rushed from his cave, crying : " You incor- 
rigible villain, are you come here to disturb my rest ? You 
shall pay dearly for this. Satisfaction I will have, and this 
it shall be, I will take you whole and broil you for break- 
fast," which he had no sooner uttered, than tumbling into 
the pit, he made the very foundations of the Mount to 
shake. " Oh, giant," quoth Jack, " where are you now ? 
Oh faith, you are gotten now into Lob's Pound, where I 
will surely plague you for your threatening words : what do 
you think now of broiling me for your breakfast? Will 



AND FAIRY TALES. 5 

no other diet serve you but poor Jack?" Thus having 
tantalised the giant for a while, he gave him a most weighty 
knock with his pickaxe on the very crown of his head, and 
killed him on the spot. 

This done, Jack filled up the pit with earth, and went to 
search the cave, which he found contained much treasure. 
When the magistrates heard of this, they made a declaration 
he should henceforth be termed Jack the Giant-Killer, and 
presented him with a sword and an embroidered belt, on 
which were written these words in letters of gold — 

" Here's the right valiant Cornish man, 
Who slew the giant Cormelian." 

The news of Jack's victory soon spread over all the West 
of England, so that another giant, named Blunderbore, 
hearing of it, vowed to be revenged on the little hero, if 
ever it was his fortune to light on him. This giant was the 
lord of an enchanted castle situated in the midst of a lone- 
some wood. Now Jack, about four months afterwards, 
walking near this wood in his journey to Wales, being 
weary, seated himself near a pleasant fountain and fell fast 
asleep. While he was enjoying his repose, the giant, coming 
for water, there discovered him, and knew him to be the 
far-famed Jack, by the lines written on the belt Without 
ado, he took Jack on his shoulders and carried him towards 
his enchanted castle. Now, as they passed through a thicket, 
the rustling of the boughs awakened Jack, who was strangely 
surprised to find himself in the clutches of the giant. His 
terror was not yet begun, for on entering the castle, he saw 
the ground strewed with human bones, the giant telling 
him his own would ere long increase them. After this the 
giant locked poor Jack in an immense chamber, leaving 
him there while he went to fetch another giant living in the 

3 



6 ENGLISH FOLK 

same wood to share in Jack's destruction. While he was 
gone, dreadful shrieks and lamentations affrighted Jack, 
especially a voice which continually cried — 

" Do what you can to get away, 

Or you'll become the giant's prey ; 
He's gone to fetch his brother, who 
Will kill, likewise devour you too." 

This dreadful noise had almost distracted Jack, who, 
going to the window, beheld afar off the two giants coming 
towards the castle. "Now," quoth Jack to himself, "my 
death or my deliverance is at hand." Now, there were strong 
cords in a corner of the room in which Jack was, and two 
of these he took, and made a strong noose at the end ; 
and while the giants were unlocking the iron gate of the 
castle he threw the ropes over each of their heads. Then 
drawing the other ends across a beam, and pulling with all 
his might, he throttled them. Then, seeing they were black 
in the face, and sliding down the rope, he came to their 
heads, when they could not defend themselves, and drawing 
his sword, slew them both. Then, taking the giant's keys, 
and unlocking the rooms, he found three fair ladies tied by 
the hair of their heads, almost starved to death. " Sweet 
ladies," quoth Jack, ** I have destroyed this monster and his 
brutish brother, and obtained your liberties." This said, he 
presented them with the keys, and so proceeded on his 
journey to Wales. Having but little money, Jack found it 
well to make the best of his way by travelling as fast 
as he could, but losing his road, he was benighted, and 
could not get a place of entertainment until, coming into a 
narrow valley, he found a large house, and by reason of his 
present needs took courage to knock at the gate. But what 
was his surprise when there came forth a monstrous giant 



AND FAIRY TALES. 7 

with two heads ; yet he did not appear so fiery as the others 
were, for he was a Welsh giant, and what he did was by 
private and secret malice under the false show of friend- 
ship. Jack, having told his condition to the giant, was 
shown into a bedroom, where, in the dead of night, he 
heard his host in another apartment muttering these 
words — 

" Though here you lodge with me this night, 
You shall not see the morning light : 
My club shall dash your brains outright I" 

"Sa/st thou so," quoth Jack; "that is like one of your 
Welsh tricks, yet I hope to be cunning enough for you." 
Then, getting out of bed, he laid a billet in the bed in his 
stead, and hid himself in a corner of the room. At the 
dead time of the night in came the Welsh giant, who 
struck several heavy blows on the bed with his club, think- 
ing he had broken every bone in Jack's skin. The next 
morning Jack, laughing in his sleeve, gave him hearty 
thanks for his night's lodging. " How have you rested?" 
quoth the giant ; " did you not feel anything in the night ? " 
" No," quoth Jack, " nothing but a rat, which gave me two 
or three slaps with her tail" With that, greatly wondering, 
the giant led Jack to breakfast, bringing him a bowl con- 
taining four gallons of hasty pudding. Being loath to let 
the giant think it too much for him, Jack put a large leather 
bag under his loose coat, in such a way that he could 
convey the pudding into it without its being perceived. 
Then, telling the giant he would show him a trick, taking a 
knife. Jack ripped open the bag, and out came all the hasty 
pudding. Whereupon, saying, "Odds splutters, hur can 
do that trick hurself," the monster took the knife, and 
ripping open his belly, fell down dead. 



8 ENGLISH FOLK 

Now, it fell in these days that King Arthur's only son 
requested his father to furnish him with a large sum of 
money, in order that he might go and seek his fortune in 
the principality of Wales, where lived a beautiful lady 
possessed with seven evil spirits. The king did his best 
to persuade his son from it, but in vain; so at last 
granted the request, and the prince set out with two horses, 
one loaded with money, the other for himself to ride upon. 
Now, after several days' travel, he came to a market-town 
in Wales, where he beheld a vast concourse of people 
gathered together. The prince demanded the reason of it, 
and was told that they had arrested a corpse for several 
large sums of money which the deceased owed when he 
died. The prince replied that it was a pity creditors should 
be so cruel, and said, " Go bury the dead, and let his 
creditors come to my lodging, and there their debts shall 
be discharged." They accordingly came, but in such great 
numbers that before night he had almost left himself 
moneyless. 

Now Jack the Giant-Killer, coming that way, was so 
taken with the generosity of the prince, that he desired to 
be his servant This being agreed upon, the next morning 
they set forward on their journey together, when, as they 
were riding out of the town, an old woman called after the 
prince, saying, "He has owed me twopence these seven 
years; pray pay me as well as the rest." Putting his 
hand to his pocket, the prince gave the woman all he had 
left, so that after their day's refreshment, which cost what 
small spell Jack had by him, they were without a penny 
between them. When the sun began to grow low, the 
king's son said, "Jack, since we have no money, where 
can we lodge this night?" But Jack replied, "Master, 
we'll do well enough, for I have an uncle lives within 
